one of the most striking hallmarks shared by various neurodegenerative diseases, including parkinson's disease, alzheimer's disease (ad), and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, is microglia-mediated neuroinflammation. increasing evidence indicates that microglial activation in the central nervous system is heterogeneous, which can be categorized into two opposite types: m1 phenotype and m2 phenotype. depending on the phenotypes activated, microglia can produce either cytotoxic or neuroprotective effects. in this review, we focus on the potential role of m1 and m2 microglia and the dynamic changes of m1/m2 phenotypes that are critically associated with the neurodegenerative diseases. generally, m1 microglia predominate at the injury site at the end stage of disease, when the immunoresolution and repair process of m2 microglia are dampened. this phenotype transformation is very complicated in ad due to the phagocytosis of regionally distributed β-amyloid (aβ) plaque and tangles that are released into the extracellular space. the endogenous stimuli including aggregated α-synuclein, mutated superoxide dismutase, aβ, and tau oligomers exist in the milieu that may persistently activate m1 pro-inflammatory responses and finally lead to irreversible neuron loss. the changes of microglial phenotypes depend on the disease stages and severity; mastering the stage-specific switching of m1/m2 phenotypes within appropriate time windows may provide better therapeutic benefit. 
one of the most striking hallmarks shared by various neurodegenerative diseases, including parkinson's disease, alzheimer's disease (ad), and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, is microglia-mediated neuroinflammation. increasing evidence indicates that microglial activation in the central nervous system is heterogeneous, which can be categorized into two opposite types: m1 phenotype and m2 phenotype. depending on the phenotypes activated, microglia can produce either cytotoxic or neuroprotective effects. in this review, we focus on the potential role of m1 and m2 microglia and the dynamic changes of m1/m2 phenotypes that are critically associated with the neurodegenerative diseases. generally, m1 microglia predominate at the injury site at the end stage of disease, when the immunoresolution and repair process of m2 microglia are dampened. this phenotype transformation is very complicated in ad due to the phagocytosis of regionally distributed β-amyloid (aβ) plaque and tangles that are released into the extracellular space. the endogenous stimuli including aggregated α-synuclein, mutated superoxide dismutase, aβ, and tau oligomers exist in the milieu that may persistently activate m1 pro-inflammatory responses and finally lead to irreversible neuron loss. the changes of microglial phenotypes depend on the disease stages and severity; mastering the stage-specific switching of m1/m2 phenotypes within appropriate time windows may provide better therapeutic benefit. 
the sense of smell is today one of the focuses of interest in aging and neurodegenerative disease research. in several neurodegenerative diseases, such as parkinson's disease and alzheimer's disease, the olfactory dysfunction is one of the initial symptoms appearing years before motor symptoms and cognitive decline, being considered a clinical marker of these diseases' early stages and a marker of disease progression and cognitive decline. overall and under the umbrella of precision medicine, attention to olfactory function may help to improve chances of success for neuroprotective and disease-modifying therapeutic strategies. the use of olfaction, as clinical marker for neurodegenerative diseases is helpful in the characterization of prodromal stages of these diseases, early diagnostic strategies, differential diagnosis, and potentially prediction of treatment success. understanding the mechanisms underlying olfactory dysfunction is central to determine its association with neurodegenerative disorders. several anatomical systems and environmental factors may underlie or contribute to olfactory loss associated with neurological diseases, although the direct biological link to each disorder remains unclear and, thus, requires further investigation. in this review, we describe the neurobiology of olfaction, and the most common olfactory function measurements in neurodegenerative diseases. we also highlight the evidence for the presence of olfactory dysfunction in several neurodegenerative diseases, its value as a clinical marker for early stages of the diseases when combined with other clinical, biological, and neuroimage markers, and its role as a useful symptom for the differential diagnosis and follow-up of disease. the neuropathological correlations and the changes in neurotransmitter systems related with olfactory dysfunction in the neurodegenerative diseases are also described.
oxidative stress is commonly involved in the pathogenesis of various neurodegenerative diseases, such as alzheimer's disease, parkinson's disease, huntington's disease and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. therefore, lipophilic antioxidants, such as vitamin a, carotinoids, vitamin e, coenzyme q10, docosahexaenoic acid and eicosapentaenoic acid, have received increasing attention as therapeutic and preventive intervention for neurodegenerative diseases. although difficulties exist with clinical studies due to the nature of the long-standing progression of neurodegenerative diseases, findings in cell and animal models, as well as biomarker studies have implied a relationship between lipophilic antioxidants and neurodegeneration. by reviewing current findings and their implication in neurodegenerative diseases, we conclude that although none of these lipophilic antioxidants have yet provided clear-cut clinical evidence toward beneficial effects in neurodegenerative diseases, they could demonstrate neuroprotection in cellular and/or animal studies. results from future multidisciplinary studies with optimization of factors including drug dosage, delivery route and chemical structure may provide us with novel treatments for neurodegenerative diseases using lipophilic antioxidants.
neurodegenerative diseases, the leading cause of morbidity and disability, are gaining increased attention as they impose a considerable socioeconomic impact, due in part to the ageing community. neuronal damage is a pathological hallmark of alzheimer's and parkinson's diseases, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, huntington's disease, spinocerebellar ataxia and multiple sclerosis, although such damage is also observed following neurotropic viral infections, stroke, genetic white matter diseases and paraneoplastic disorders. despite the different aetiologies, for example, infections, genetic mutations, trauma and protein aggregations, neuronal damage is frequently associated with chronic activation of an innate immune response in the cns. the growing awareness that the immune system is inextricably involved in shaping the brain during development as well as mediating damage, but also regeneration and repair, has stimulated therapeutic approaches to modulate the immune system in neurodegenerative diseases. here, we review the current understanding of how astrocytes and microglia, as well as neurons and oligodendrocytes, shape the neuroimmune response during development, and how aberrant responses that arise due to genetic or environmental triggers may predispose the cns to neurodegenerative diseases. we discuss the known interactions between the peripheral immune system and the brain, and review the current concepts on how immune cells enter and leave the cns. a better understanding of neuroimmune interactions during development and disease will be key to further manipulating these responses and the development of effective therapies to improve quality of life, and reduce the impact of neuroinflammatory and degenerative diseases.
over the past decades, cell apoptosis has been significantly reputed as an accidental, redundant and alternative manner of cell demise which partakes in homeostasis in the development of extensive diseases. nevertheless, necroptosis, another novel manner of cell death through a caspase-independent way, especially in neurodegenerative diseases remains ambiguous. the cognition of this form of cell demise is helpful to understand other forms of morphological resemblance of necrosis. additionally, the concrete signal mechanism in the regulation of necroptosis is beneficial to the diagnosis and treatment of neurodegenerative diseases. recent studies have demonstrated that necroptotic inhibitor, 24(s)-hydroxycholesterol and partial specific histone deacetylase inhibitors could alleviate pathogenetic conditions of neurodegenerative diseases via necroptosis pathway. in this review, we summarize recent researches about mechanisms and modulation of necroptotic signaling pathways and probe into the role of programmed necroptotic cell demise in neurodegenerative diseases such as parkinson's disease, multiple sclerosis, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
the past decade has seen tremendous efforts in biomarker discovery and validation for neurodegenerative diseases. the source and type of biomarkers has continued to grow for central nervous system diseases, from biofluid-based biomarkers (blood or cerebrospinal fluid (csf)), to nucleic acids, tissue, and imaging. while dna remains a predominant biomarker used to identify familial forms of neurodegenerative diseases, various types of rna have more recently been linked to familial and sporadic forms of neurodegenerative diseases during the past few years. imaging approaches continue to evolve and are making major contributions to target engagement and early diagnostic biomarkers. incorporation of biomarkers into drug development and clinical trials for neurodegenerative diseases promises to aid in the development and demonstration of target engagement and drug efficacy for neurologic disorders. this review will focus on recent advancements in developing biomarkers for clinical utility in alzheimer's disease (ad), parkinson's disease (pd), and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (als).
neurodegenerative diseases are a growing health concern. the increasing incidences of these disorders have a great impact on the patients' quality of life. although the mechanisms of neurodegenerative diseases are still far from being clarified, several studies look for new discoveries about their pathophysiology and prevention. furthermore, evidence has shown a strong correlation between obesity and the development of alzheimer's disease (ad) and parkinson's disease (pd). metabolic changes caused by overweight are related to damage to the central nervous system (cns), which can lead to neural death, either by apoptosis or cell necrosis, as well as alter the synaptic plasticity of the neuron. this review aims to show the association between neurodegenerative diseases, focusing on ad and pd, and metabolic alterations.
neurodegenerative diseases, including alzheimer's disease (ad), parkinson's disease (pd), huntington's disease (hd), and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (als), currently affect more than 6 million people in the united states. unfortunately, there are no treatments that slow or prevent disease development and progression. regardless of the underlying cause of the disorder, age is the strongest risk factor for developing these maladies, suggesting that changes that occur in the aging brain put it at increased risk for neurodegenerative disease development. moreover, since there are a number of different changes that occur in the aging brain, it is unlikely that targeting a single change is going to be effective for disease treatment. thus, compounds that have multiple biological activities that can impact the various age-associated changes in the brain that contribute to neurodegenerative disease development and progression are needed. the plant-derived flavonoids have a wide range of activities that could make them particularly effective for blocking the age-associated toxicity pathways associated with neurodegenerative diseases. in this review, the evidence for beneficial effects of multiple flavonoids in models of ad, pd, hd, and als is presented and common mechanisms of action are identified. overall, the preclinical data strongly support further investigation of specific flavonoids for the treatment of neurodegenerative diseases.
neurodegenerative diseases are disorders that are characterized by a progressive decline of the motor and/or cognitive function caused by a selective loss of neurons within the central nervous system. recent advancements in the translational research have facilitated extensive insights into the molecular pathophysiology of neurodegenerative diseases. nonetheless, a myriad of compounds that suppressed the disease progression in cellular and animal models did not exhibit efficacy in clinical trials. perhaps, various biological, medical, and methodological factors could be attributed to unfavorable results of clinical trials of such disease-modifying therapies. primarily, the fact that pathological changes at molecular and cellular levels precede the clinical onset by several years underscores a pressing need for the initiation of interventions before the emergence of neurological symptoms. using exquisite biomarkers, recent studies revealed the preclinical and prodromal progression of pathophysiology, as well as compensatory brain responses in several neurodegenerative diseases. this review aims to discuss the recent advancement of biomarker studies on presymptomatic subjects and the perspective on a preventive trial of disease-modifying therapies for devastating neurological disorders.
more than 600 human disorders afflict the nervous system. of these, neurodegenerative diseases are usually characterised by onset in late adulthood, progressive clinical course, and neuronal loss with regional specificity in the central nervous system. they include alzheimer's disease and other less frequent dementias, brain cancer, degenerative nerve diseases, encephalitis, epilepsy, genetic brain disorders, head and brain malformations, hydrocephalus, stroke, parkinson's disease, multiple sclerosis, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (als or lou gehrig's disease), huntington's disease, and prion diseases, among others. neurodegeneration usually affects, but is not limited to, the cerebral cortex, intracranial white matter, basal ganglia, thalamus, hypothalamus, brain stem, and cerebellum. although the majority of neurodegenerative diseases are sporadic, mendelian inheritance is well documented. intriguingly, the clinical presentations and neuropathological findings in inherited neurodegenerative forms are often indistinguishable from those of sporadic cases, suggesting that converging genomic signatures and pathophysiologic mechanisms underlie both hereditary and sporadic neurodegenerative diseases. unfortunately, effective therapies for these diseases are scarce to non-existent. in this chapter, we highlight the clinical and genetic features associated with the rare inherited forms of neurodegenerative diseases, including ataxias, multiple system atrophy, spastic paraplegias, parkinson's disease, dementias, motor neuron diseases, and rare metabolic disorders.
neurodegenerative diseases are sporadic and rare hereditary disorders of the central nervous system, which cause a slowly progressive loss of function of specific neuron populations and their connections. severe impairments and care dependency can be the sequelae. neurodegenerative disorders are diseases of older people; therefore, the demographic shift leads to an increase in the number of affected patients. radiologists will also become more involved. for this reason important neurodegenerative diseases are presented in this article. in addition to alzheimer's and parkinson's diseases these also include frontotemporal lobar degeneration, lewy body dementia, vascular dementia, creutzfeldt-jakob disease and huntington's chorea. the clinical symptoms and diagnostics are described, whereby the focus lies on typical results of morphological imaging.
neurodegenerative disorders are characterized by progressive loss of selectively vulnerable populations of neurons, which contrasts with select static neuronal loss because of metabolic or toxic disorders. neurodegenerative diseases can be classified according to primary clinical features (e.g., dementia, parkinsonism, or motor neuron disease), anatomic distribution of neurodegeneration (e.g., frontotemporal degenerations, extrapyramidal disorders, or spinocerebellar degenerations), or principal molecular abnormality. the most common neurodegenerative disorders are amyloidoses, tauopathies, α-synucleinopathies, and tdp-43 proteinopathies. the protein abnormalities in these disorders have abnormal conformational properties. growing experimental evidence suggests that abnormal protein conformers may spread from cell to cell along anatomically connected pathways, which may in part explain the specific anatomical patterns observed at autopsy. in this review, we detail the human pathology of select neurodegenerative disorders, focusing on their main protein aggregates.
inen, chinesea comprehensive review of the network regulation of exosomes and micrornas (mirnas) in neurodegenerative diseases was done, centering on the mechanism of the formation of exosomes and mirnas and the sorting mechanism of exosomal mirnas, with the aim to provide a theoretical basis in the search of biomarkers and the treatment of neurodegenerative diseases. the comprehensive search used online literature databases including ncbi pubmed, web of science, google scholar, and baidu scholar. the study selection was based on the following keywords: exosomes, mirnas, central nervous system (cns), and neurodegenerative diseases. the time limit for literature retrieval was from the year 2000 to 2018, with language restriction in english. relevant articles were carefully reviewed, with no exclusions applied to study design and publication type. exosomes are the smallest nanoscale membranous microvesicles secreted by cells and contain important mirnas, among other rich contents. in the cns, exosomes can transport amyloid β-protein, α-synuclein, huntington-associated protein 1, and superoxide dismutase i to other cells. these events relieve the abnormal accumulation of proteins and aggravating neurological diseases. in some neurodegenerative diseases including alzheimer's disease, parkinson's disease, huntington's disease, and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, mirnas are pathologically altered as an inexorable course, suggesting that mirnas may contribute neurodegeneration. exosomes and mirnas form a network to regulate the homeostasis of the cns, both synergistically and individually. the network of exosomes and mirnas that regulates cns homeostasis is a promising biomarker for the diagnosis and treatment of neurodegenerative diseases.外泌体与micrornas调控网络失衡对神经退行性疾病的影响摘要目的：围绕外泌体和micrornas的形成机制，以及外泌体micrornas的分选机制，综述了外泌体和micrornas在神经退行性疾病中的网络调控作用，旨在为神经退行性疾病的治疗、生物标志的寻找提供理论基础。 数据源：基于在线文献数据库的全面检索，包含ncbi pubmed，科学引文索引，google学术搜索和百度学术搜索等。 文献筛选：文献筛选基于外泌体、micrornas、中枢神经系统和神经退行性疾病关键词进行检索，检索年限从2000年到2018年，所有检索内容语言均为英文。相关文章已进行仔细筛选，没有因研究设计和出版类型而排除文献。 结果：外泌体是细胞分泌的纳米级别膜性小泡，包含丰富的内容物，其中较为重要的就是micrornas。在中枢神经系统中，外泌体能转运β样淀粉蛋白、α-突触核蛋白、亨廷顿相关蛋白1以及超氧化物岐化酶i到其它细胞，即能缓解蛋白的异常积聚，也可能加重神经系统疾病。在神经退行性疾病，包括ad、pd、hd、als，micrornas会发生病理上的改变，且是一个必然的过程，暗示着micrornas可能是导致神经退行性疾病的因素。不仅如此，在中枢神经系统中，外泌体和micrornas既有协同调控也有单独调控，两者构成网络共同调控着中枢神经系统稳态。 结论：外泌体和micrornas形成网络共同调控中枢神经系统的稳态，有望成为诊断和治疗神经退行性疾病的有效工具。.
the increased incidence of neurodegenerative diseases represents a huge challenge for societies. these diseases are characterized by neuronal death and include several different pathologies, such as alzheimer's disease, parkinson's disease, multiple sclerosis, huntington's disease and transmissible spongiform encephalopathies. most of these pathologies are often associated with the aggregation of misfolded proteins, such as amyloid-ß, tau, α-synuclein, huntingtin and prion proteins. however, the precise mechanisms that lead to neuronal dysfunction and death in these diseases remain poorly understood. nucleic acid aptamers represent a new class of ligands that could be useful to better understand these diseases and develop better diagnosis and therapy. in this review, several of these aptamers are presented as well as their applications for neurodegenerative diseases.
prions are defined as proteinaceous infectious particles that do not contain nucleic acids. neuropathological investigations of post-mortem brains and recent studies of experimental transmission have suggested that amyloid-like abnormal protein aggregates, which are the defining feature of many neurodegenerative diseases, behave like prions and propagate throughout the brain. this prion-like propagation may be the underlying mechanism of onset and progression of neurodegenerative diseases, although the precise molecular mechanisms involved remain unclear. however, in vitro and in vivo experimental models of prion-like propagation using pathogenic protein seeds are well established and are extremely valuable for the exploration and evaluation of novel drugs and therapies for neurodegenerative diseases for which there is no effective treatment. in this chapter, we introduce the experimental models of prion-like propagation of α-synuclein, which is accumulated in parkinson's disease, dementia with lewy bodies, and multiple system atrophy, and we describe their applications for the development of new diagnostic and therapeutic modalities. we also introduce the concept of "α-syn strains," which may underlie the pathological and clinical diversity of α-synucleinopathies.
most common neurodegenerative diseases feature deposition of protein amyloids and degeneration of brain networks. amyloids are ordered protein assemblies that can act as templates for their own replication through monomer addition. evidence suggests that this characteristic may underlie the progression of pathology in neurodegenerative diseases. many different amyloid proteins, including aβ, tau, and α-synuclein, exhibit properties similar to those of infectious prion protein in experimental systems: discrete and self-replicating amyloid structures, transcellular propagation of aggregation, and transmissible neuropathology. this review discusses the contribution of prion phenomena and transcellular propagation to the progression of pathology in common neurodegenerative diseases such as alzheimer's and parkinson's. it reviews fundamental events such as cell entry, amplification, and transcellular movement. it also discusses amyloid strains, which produce distinct patterns of neuropathology and spread through the nervous system. these concepts may impact the development of new diagnostic and therapeutic strategies.
in our ageing population, neurodegenerative disorders carry an enormous personal, societal and economic burden. although neurodegenerative diseases are often thought of as clinicopathological entities, increasing evidence suggests a considerable overlap in the molecular underpinnings of their pathogenesis. such overlapping biological processes include the handling of misfolded proteins, defective organelle trafficking, rna processing, synaptic health and neuroinflammation. collectively but in different proportions, these biological processes in neurons or non-neuronal cells lead to regionally distinct patterns of neuronal vulnerability and progression of pathology that could explain the disease symptomology. with the advent of patient-derived cellular models and novel genetic manipulation tools, we are now able to interrogate this commonality despite the cellular complexity of the brain in order to develop novel therapeutic strategies to prevent or arrest neurodegeneration. here, we describe broadly these concepts and their relevance across neurodegenerative diseases.
autophagy is a lysosome-dependent intracellular degradation process that allows recycling of cytoplasmic constituents into bioenergetic and biosynthetic materials for maintenance of homeostasis. since the function of autophagy is particularly important in various stress conditions, perturbation of autophagy can lead to cellular dysfunction and diseases. accumulation of abnormal protein aggregates, a common cause of neurodegenerative diseases, can be reduced through autophagic degradation. recent studies have revealed defects in autophagy in most cases of neurodegenerative disorders. moreover, deregulated excessive autophagy can also cause neurodegeneration. thus, healthy activation of autophagy is essential for therapeutic approaches in neurodegenerative diseases and many autophagy-regulating compounds are under development for therapeutic purposes. this review describes the overall role of autophagy in neurodegeneration, focusing on various therapeutic strategies for modulating specific stages of autophagy and on the current status of drug development. 
extensive studies have reported the significant roles of numerous cellular features and processes in properly maintaining neuronal morphology and function throughout the lifespan of an animal. any alterations in their homeostasis appear to be strongly associated with neuronal aging and the pathogenesis of various neurodegenerative diseases, even before the occurrence of prominent neuronal death. however, until recently, the primary focus of studies regarding many neurodegenerative diseases has been on the massive cell death occurring at the late stages of disease progression. thus, our understanding on early neuropathy in these diseases remains relatively limited. the complicated nature of various neuropathic features manifested early in neurodegenerative diseases suggests the involvement of a system-wide transcriptional regulation and epigenetic control. epigenetic alterations and consequent changes in the neuronal transcriptome are now begun to be extensively studied in various neurodegenerative diseases. upon the catastrophic incident of neuronal death in disease progression, it is utterly difficult to reverse the deleterious defects by pharmacological treatments, and therefore, therapeutics targeting the system-wide transcriptional dysregulation associated with specific early neuropathy is considered a better option. here, we review our current understanding on the system-wide transcriptional dysregulation that is likely associated with early neuropathy shown in various neurodegenerative diseases and discuss the possible future developments of pharmaceutical therapeutics.
more than 30 years ago, two unexpected findings were discovered that challenged conventional thinking in biology. the first was the identification of a misfolded protein with transmissible properties associated with a group of neurodegenerative diseases known as transmissible spongiform encephalopathies. the second was the discovery of a new pathway used for the extracellular release of biomolecules, including extracellular vesicles called exosomes. two decades later, the convergence of these pathways was shown when exosomes were found to play a significant role in both the transmission and propagation of protein aggregates in disease. recent research has now revealed that the majority of proteins involved in neurodegenerative diseases are transported in exosomes, and that external stresses due to age-related impairment of protein quality control mechanisms can promote the transcellular flux of these proteins in exosomes. significantly, exosomes provide an environment that can induce the conformational conversion of native proteins into aggregates that can be transmitted to otherwise aggregate-free cells in the brain. here we review the current roles of exosomes in the pathology of neurodegenerative diseases.
neurodegenerative and cerebrovascular diseases cause considerable human suffering, and therapy options for these two disease categories are limited or non-existing. it is an emerging notion that neurodegenerative and cerebrovascular diseases are linked in several ways, and in this review, we discuss the current status regarding vascular dysregulation in neurodegenerative disease, and conversely, how cerebrovascular diseases are associated with central nervous system (cns) degeneration and dysfunction. the emerging links between neurodegenerative and cerebrovascular diseases are reviewed with a particular focus on pericytes-important cells that ensheath the endothelium in the microvasculature and which are pivotal for blood-brain barrier function and cerebral blood flow. finally, we address how novel molecular and cellular insights into pericytes and other vascular cell types may open new avenues for diagnosis and therapy development for these important diseases.
neuronal cell death in the central nervous system has always been a challenging process to decipher. in normal physiological conditions, neuronal cell death is restricted in the adult brain, even in aged individuals. however, in the pathological conditions of various neurodegenerative diseases, cell death and shrinkage in a specific region of the brain represent a fundamental pathological feature across different neurodegenerative diseases. in this review, we will briefly go through the general pathways of cell death and describe evidence for cell death in the context of individual common neurodegenerative diseases, discussing our current understanding of cell death by connecting with renowned pathogenic proteins, including tau, amyloid-beta, alpha-synuclein, huntingtin and tdp-43.
in the last few years, exciting properties have emerged regarding the activation, signaling, mechanisms of action, and therapeutic targeting of the two types of neurotrophin receptors: the p75ntr with its intracellular and extracellular peptides, the trks, their precursors and their complexes. this review summarizes these new developments, with particular focus on neurodegenerative diseases. based on the evolving knowledge, innovative concepts have been formulated regarding the pathogenesis of these diseases, especially the alzheimer's and two other, the parkinson's and huntington's diseases. the medical progresses include original procedures of diagnosis, started from studies in mice and now investigated for human application, based on innovative classes of receptor agonists and blockers. in parallel, comprehensive studies have been and are being carried out for the development of drugs. the relevance of these studies is based on the limitations of the therapies employed until recently, especially for the treatment of alzheimer's patients. starting from well known drugs, previously employed for non-neurodegenerative diseases, the ongoing progress has lead to the development of small molecules that cross rapidly the blood-brain barrier. among these molecules the most promising are specific blockers of the p75ntr receptor. additional drugs, that activate trk receptors, were shown effective against synaptic loss and memory deficits. in the near future such approaches, coordinated with treatments with monoclonal antibodies and with developments in the microrna field, are expected to improve the therapy of neurodegenerative diseases, and may be relevant also for other human disease conditions.
widespread protein aggregation occurs in the living system under stress or during aging, owing to disturbance of endoplasmic reticulum (er) proteostasis. many neurodegenerative diseases may have a common mechanism: the failure of protein homeostasis. perturbation of er results in unfolded protein response (upr). prolonged chronical upr may activate apoptotic pathways and cause cell death. research articles on sigma-1 receptor were reviewed. er is associated to mitochondria by the mitochondria-associated er-membrane, mam. the sigma-1 receptor (sig-1r), a well-known er-chaperone localizes in the mam. it serves for ca2+-signaling between the er and mitochondria, involved in ion channel activities and especially important during neuronal differentiation. sig-1r acts as central modulator in inter-organelle signaling. sig-1r helps cell survival by attenuating er-stress. according to sequence based predictions sig-1r is a 223 amino acid protein with two transmembrane (2tm) domains. the x-ray structure of the sig-1r [1] showed a membrane-bound trimeric assembly with one transmembrane (1tm) region. despite the in vitro determined assembly, the results of in vivo studies are rather consistent with the 2tm structure. the receptor has unique and versatile pharmacological profile. dimethyl tryptamine (dmt) and neuroactive steroids are endogenous ligands that activate sig-1r. the receptor has a plethora of interacting client proteins. sig-1r exists in oligomeric structures (dimer-trimer-octamer-multimer) and this fact may explain interaction with diverse proteins. sig-1r agonists have been used in the treatment of different neurodegenerative diseases, e.g. alzheimer's and parkinson's diseases (ad and pd) and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. utilization of sig-1r agents early in ad and similar other diseases has remained an overlooked therapeutic opportunity.
in patients with neurodegenerative diseases, there is a spectrum of smell dysfunction ranging from severe loss, as seen in alzheimer's disease and parkinson's disease, to relatively little loss, as seen in progressive supranuclear palsy. given the ubiquitous but varying degrees of olfactory dysfunction among such diseases, it is conceivable that differential disruption of a common primordial neuropathological substrate causes these differences in olfactory function. for example, the amount of damage to forebrain neurotransmitter and neuromodulator circuits, most notably those involving cholinergic transmission, appears to be correlated with quantitative smell test scores across a wide range of neurodegenerative diseases. thus, a key question is whether damage to such a substrate is the basis for the perceptual differences in olfaction or whether disease-specific or other entities, such as respiratory infections or pollution, are responsible. in light of the early preclinical onset of smell deficits in many neurodegenerative diseases, the answer to this question might provide crucial insight into the cause of disease pathology at its earliest stages of development.
sex differences have been clinically documented in numerous neurodegenerative diseases and yet the reasons for these differences are not well understood. recent studies have found that microglia, the innate immune cells of the central nervous system, are a key cell type involved in neurodegenerative diseases. this cell type displays sex differences in their expression profiles and function. could these sex differences in microglia explain the sex differences seen in neurodegenerative diseases? how can we further probe these differences to better understand disease mechanisms? in this opinion, we highlight the recent evidence that microglia have sex differences, factors that contribute to these differences, and how these differences could shed new light on the pathophysiology of neurological diseases.
olfactory dysfunction seems to occur earlier than classic motor and cognitive symptoms in many neurodegenerative diseases, including parkinson's disease (pd) and alzheimer's disease (ad). thus, the use of the olfactory system as a clinical marker for neurodegenerative diseases is helpful in the characterization of prodromal stages of these diseases, early diagnostic strategies, differential diagnosis, and, potentially, prediction of treatment success. the use of genetic and neurotoxin animal models has contributed to the understanding of the mechanisms underlying olfactory dysfunction in a number of neurodegenerative diseases. in this chapter, we provide an overview of behavioral and neurochemical alterations observed in animal models of different neurodegenerative diseases (such as genetic and aβ infusion models for ad and neurotoxins and genetic models of pd), in which olfactory dysfunction has been described.
neurodegenerative diseases, including parkinson's and alzheimer's, are a heterogeneous group of brain disorders characterized by the progressive degeneration of the structure and function of the central or peripheral nervous system. it is thought that the number of people affected by these pathologies will increase in future decades, particularly in the more economically developed countries, where the populations are experiencing a demographic shift towards older ages. for many of these pathologies, and in particular for alzheimer's disease, no effective treatments are available, and the consequent economic and social costs are very high. scientific progress in recent decades has provided a better understanding of the genetic and biological mechanisms responsible for these neurodegenerative diseases, and offers the hope for new therapeutic approaches in the near future. meanwhile, the lack of effective therapies for these diseases has caused researchers to focus attention on the powerful opportunity of prevention, seen on the one hand as a series of healthcare measures and patient behaviors, and on the other hand as treatments exploiting several molecules or compounds with the potential to slow down the appearance of the first signs of pathology or even to prevent these diseases. among these, curcumin, flavonoids, such as quercetin, gingko biloba, and folic acid have attracted the attention of scientists, and ways are being explored to increase their effectiveness and bioavailability in the site of action. most molecules suffer from problems of solubility, or bioavailability, or the ability to cross the blood brain barrier, and one solution to this limitation being explored is nanomedicine. polymeric nanoparticles, as well as liposomes, and functionalized nanosystems may overcome several bioavailability limits of active molecules and increase their effectiveness in the brain. this review offers an overview of small molecules that may prove effective in preventing neurodegenerative diseases, and describes the strategies in nanomedicine that are being studied to improve their bioavailability.
extracellular vesicles (evs) are released by all neural cells, including neurons, oligodendrocytes, astrocytes, and microglia. the lack of adequate technology has not halted neuroscientists from investigating evs as a mean to decipher neurodegenerative disorders, still in search of comprehensible pathogenic mechanisms and efficient treatment. evs are thought to be one of ways neurodegenerative pathologies spread in the brain, but also one of the ways the brain tries to displace toxic proteins, making their meaning in pathogenesis uncertain. evs, however do reach biological fluids where they can be analyzed, and might therefore constitute clinically decisive biomarkers for neurodegenerative diseases in the future. finally, if they constitute a physiological inter-cell communication system, they may represent also a very specific drug delivery tool for a difficult target such as the brain. we try to resume here available information on the role of evs in neurodegeneration, with a special focus on alzheimer's disease, progressive multiple sclerosis, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, and huntington's disease.
most of the neurodegenerative diseases that afflict humans manifest with the intraneuronal accumulation of toxic proteins that are aggregate-prone. extensive data in cell and neuronal models support the concept that such proteins, like mutant huntingtin or alpha-synuclein, are substrates for macroautophagy (hereafter autophagy). furthermore, autophagy-inducing compounds lower the levels of such proteins and ameliorate their toxicity in diverse animal models of neurodegenerative diseases. however, most of these compounds also have autophagy-independent effects and it is important to understand if similar benefits are seen with genetic strategies that upregulate autophagy, as this strengthens the validity of this strategy in such diseases. here we review studies in vertebrate models using genetic manipulations of core autophagy genes and describe how these improve pathology and neurodegeneration, supporting the validity of autophagy upregulation as a target for certain neurodegenerative diseases.
neuronal homeostasis depends on the proper functioning of quality control systems like autophagy. this mechanism is responsible of the clearance of misfolded proteins, aggregates and the turnover of organelles within the neuron. autophagic dysfunction has been described in many neurodegenerative diseases. it can occur at several steps of the autophagic machinery and can contribute to the formation of intracellular aggregates and ultimately to neuronal death. accordingly restoring autophagy activity in affected neurons can be an attractive therapeutic approach to fight neurodegeneration. in this review we summarize the present encouraging strategies that have been achieved with pharmacological and genetic treatments aimed to induce neuronal autophagy in experimental models of neurodegenerative diseases. 
neurodegenerative diseases are the result of progressive loss of neurons and axons in the central nervous system (cns), which can lead to cognition and motor dysfunction. it is well known that cns inflammation and immune activation play a major role in the pathophysiology of neurodegenerative diseases. although the blood-brain barrier (bbb) is able to protect the cns from immune activation, it becomes more permeable during inflammation, which renders the brain vulnerable to infections. a better understanding of the interaction between inflammatory mediators, such as cytokines, and the activated immune response, including astrocytes and microglia, is critical for the development of new therapeutic strategies for neurodegenerative diseases. this review first describes the role of innate immune activation in neurodegenerative diseases and illustrates the factors that contribute to the communication between the cns and the immune system. a closer look is given at the role of the bbb in inflammation and immunity, as well as at the animal models used to study inflammation in neurodegenerative diseases. finally, this review outlines the key pathways and biological mechanisms involved in cns diseases, with a particular focus on multiple sclerosis (ms), parkinson's disease (pd), and alzheimer's disease (ad).
within the last century, human lifestyle and dietary behaviors have changed dramatically. these changes, especially concerning hygiene, have led to a marked decrease in some diseases, i.e., infectious diseases. however, other diseases that can be attributed to the so-called 'western' lifestyle have increased, i.e., metabolic and cardiovascular disorders. more recently, multifactorial disorders, such as autoimmune and neurodegenerative diseases, have been associated with changes in diet and the gut microbiome. in particular, short chain fatty acid (scfa)-producing bacteria are of high interest. scfas are the main metabolites produced by bacteria and are often reduced in a dysbiotic state, causing an inflammatory environment. based on advanced technologies, high-resolution investigations of the abundance and composition of the commensal microbiome are now possible. these techniques enable the assessment of the relationship between the gut microbiome, its metabolome and gut-associated immune and neuronal cells. while a growing number of studies have shown the indirect impact of gut metabolites, mediated by alterations of immune-mediated mechanisms, the direct influence of these compounds on cells of the central nervous system needs to be further elucidated. for instance, the scfa propionic acid (pa) increases the amount of intestine-derived regulatory t cells, which furthermore can positively affect the central nervous system (cns), e.g., by increasing remyelination. however, the question of if and how pa can directly interact with cns-resident cells is a matter of debate. in this review, we discuss the impact of an altered microbiome composition in relation to various diseases and discuss how the commensal microbiome is shaped, starting from the beginning of human life.
protein homeostasis (proteostasis) is achieved by the interplay among various components and pathways inside a cell. dysfunction in proteostasis leads to protein misfolding and aggregation which is ubiquitously associated with many neurodegenerative disorders, although the exact role of these aggregate in the pathogenesis remains unknown. many neurodegenerative diseases, including alzheimer's disease, parkinson's disease, huntington's disease, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, and others are characterized by the conversion of specific protein aggregates into protein inclusions and/or plaques in degenerating brains. apart from the conventional disease specific proteins, such as amyloid-β, α - synuclein, huntingtin protein, and prions that are known to aggregate, a number of other proteins play a vital role in aggravating the disease condition. in this review, we discuss the disease etiology, mechanism, the role of various pathways, molecular machinery including molecular chaperones, protein degradation pathways, and the active formation of inclusions in various neurodegenerative diseases. we also highlight the approaches, strategies, and methods that have been used for the treatment of these complex diseases over the years and the efforts that have potential in the near future.
when thinking about neurodegenerative diseases, the first symptoms that come to mind are loss of memory and learning capabilities, which all resemble hallmarks of manifestation of such diseases in the central nervous system (cns). however, the gut comprises the largest nervous system outside the cns that is autonomously active and in close interplay with its microbiota. therefore, the enteric nervous system (ens) might serve as an indicator of degenerative pathomechanisms that also affect the cns. on the other hand, it might offer an entry point for devastating influences from the microbial community or - conversely - for therapeutic approaches via gut commensals. within the last years, the ens and gut microbiota therefore have sparked the interest of researchers of cns diseases and we here report on recent findings and open questions, especially with regard to alzheimer and parkinson diseases.
disorders of sleep are an integral part of neurodegenerative diseases and include insomnia, sleep-wake cycle disruption, excessive daytime sleepiness that may be manifested as persistent somnolence or sudden onset of sleep episodes, obstructive and central sleep apnea, rapid eye movement sleep behavior disorder, and restless legs syndrome. the origin of these sleep disorders is multifactorial including degeneration of the brain areas that modulate sleep, the symptoms of the disease, and the effect of medications. treatment of sleep disorders in patients with neurodegenerative diseases should be individualized and includes behavioral therapy, sleep hygiene, bright light therapy, melatonin, hypnotics, waking-promoting agents, and continuous positive airway pressure. 
autophagy, a catabolic process necessary for the maintenance of intracellular homeostasis, has recently been the focus of numerous human diseases and conditions, such as aging, cancer, development, immunity, longevity, and neurodegeneration. however, the continued presence of autophagy is essential for cell survival and dysfunctional autophagy is thought to speed up the progression of neurodegeneration. the actual molecular mechanism behind the progression of dysfunctional autophagy is not yet fully understood. emerging evidence suggests that basal autophagy is necessary for the removal of misfolded, aggregated proteins and damaged cellular organelles through lysosomal mediated degradation. physiologically, neurodegenerative disorders are related to the accumulation of amyloid β peptide and α-synuclein protein aggregation, as seen in patients with alzheimer's disease and parkinson's disease, respectively. even though autophagy could impact several facets of human biology and disease, it generally functions as a clearance for toxic proteins in the brain, which contributes novel insight into the pathophysiological understanding of neurodegenerative disorders. in particular, several studies demonstrate that natural compounds or small molecule autophagy enhancer stimuli are essential in the clearance of amyloid β and α-synuclein deposits. therefore, this review briefly deliberates on the recent implications of autophagy in neurodegenerative disorder control, and emphasizes the opportunities and potential therapeutic application of applied autophagy. [bmb reports 2017; 50(7): 345-354].
neurodegenerative diseases are among the most serious health problems affecting millions of people worldwide. such diseases are characterized by a progressive degeneration and / or death of neurons in the central nervous system. currently, there are no therapeutic approaches to cure or even halt the progression of neurodegenerative diseases. during the last two decades, much attention has been paid to the neuroprotective and anti-neurodegenerative activities of compounds isolated from natural products with high efficacy and low toxicity. accumulating evidence indicates that berberine, an isoquinoline alkaloid isolated from traditional chinese medicinal herbs, may act as a promising anti-neurodegenerative agent by inhibiting the activity of the most important pathogenic enzymes, ameliorating intracellular oxidative stress, attenuating neuroinflammation, triggering autophagy and protecting neurons against apoptotic cell death. this review attempts to summarize the current state of knowledge regarding the therapeutic potential of berberine against neurodegenerative diseases, with a focus on the molecular mechanisms that underlie its effects on alzheimer's, parkinson's and huntington's diseases.
many neurodegenerative diseases including parkinson's disease, alzheimer's disease, prion's disease, polyq and huntington's disease share abnormal folding of potentially cytotoxic protein species associated with degeneration and death of specific neuronal populations. in order to maintain cellular protein homeostasis, neurons have developed an intrinsic protein quality control system as a strategy to counteract protein aggregation and their toxicity. heat shock proteins are an essential component for regulating protein quality control and contribute potentially in the process of protein folding, prevent protein aggregation and in disaggregation in several neurodegenerative diseases. therefore, molecular chaperones are considered an exciting therapeutic target. in this book chapter, we will focus on the potential importance of different heat shock proteins in neurodegenerative diseases and understand their mechanisms to protect neurons form aggregates and their toxicity.
the notion that one common pathogenic pathway could account for the various clinically distinguishable, typically late-onset neurodegenerative diseases might appear unlikely given the plethora of diverse primary causes of neurodegeneration. on the contrary, an autoinflammatory pathogenic mechanism allows diverse genetic and environmental factors to converge into a common chain of causality. inflammation has long been known to correlate with neurodegeneration. until recently this relationship was seen as one of consequence rather than cause-with inflammatory cells and events acting to 'clean up the mess' after neurological injury. this explanation is demonstrably inadequate and it is now clear that inflammation is at the very least, rate-limiting for neurodegeneration (and more likely, a principal underlying cause in most if not all neurodegenerative diseases), protective in its initial acute phase, but pernicious in its latter chronic phase.
proteins are major components of the biological functions in a cell. biology demands that a protein must fold into its stable three-dimensional structure to become functional. in an unfavorable cellular environment, protein may get misfolded resulting in its aggregation. these conformational disorders are directly related to the tissue damage resulting in cellular dysfunction giving rise to different diseases. this way, several neurodegenerative diseases such as alzheimer, parkinson huntington diseases and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis are caused. misfolding of the protein is prevented by innate molecular chaperones of different classes. it is envisaged that work on this line is likely to translate the knowledge into the development of possible strategies for early diagnosis and efficient management of such related human diseases. the present review deals with the human neurodegenerative diseases caused due to the protein misfolding highlighting pathomechanisms and therapeutic intervention.
transcranial sonography (tcs) of the brain parenchyma detects alterations in the substantia nigra (sn), raphe nuclei and basal ganglia; this technique has been established as a tool for the early diagnosis of parkinson's disease and differential diagnosis from atypical parkinsonian syndromes. here, we aimed to review the main applications of tcs in neurodegenerative diseases presenting with dementia syndrome, focusing on alzheimer's disease (ad), dementia with lewy bodies (dlb), frontotemporal lobar degeneration, idiopathic normal pressure hydrocephalus, and atypical and secondary parkinsonisms. the finding of bilaterally marked hyperechogenicity of the sn appears as a characteristic feature of dlb, while it is found only in a minority of ad patients. sn hyperechogenicity is also detected in most patients with corticobasal degeneration and in about one third of patients with progressive supranuclear palsy, in which is constantly associated with hyperechogenic alterations of the basal ganglia. in conclusion, tcs is a valid supportive tool in the diagnostic workup of patients with dementia due to different neurodegenerative conditions. a promising new application is the differentiation of dlb from ad even at the early stages of these diseases.
autophagy is the lysosome-mediated bulk degradation of cellular components for material recycling to maintain cellular homeostasis. autophagy was initially regarded as a nonselective process, however, recent evidence indicates that this process can in fact be highly selective, especially for targeting and degrading organelles, invading pathogens and protein aggregates. recent studies have revealed an intrinsic connection between selective autophagy and neurodegenerative diseases, including alzheimer's disease and parkinson's disease. given the vital roles of selective autophagy in these neurodegenerative diseases, modulation of this process is emerging as a new therapeutic strategy for neuroprotection. this review introduces the concept of selective autophagy, provides an overview of the pathological connection between selective autophagy and neurodegenerative diseases, and discusses approaches to modulate selective autophagy for therapeutic effects against neurodegenerative diseases.
clinical gene therapy has made important advances over the last decade. among neurological diseases, severe genetic neurodegenerative conditions have been the focus of initial clinical applications. gene therapy has also addressed complex neurodegenerative diseases, particularly parkinson's disease, with encouraging results in human patients, demonstrating that specific targeting of central nervous system (cns) cells is a relevant strategy for severe pathologies and that efficient access to the cns with viral vectors is an achievable goal. the purpose of this review is to summarize the gene therapy clinical applications that have been conducted for neurodegenerative diseases. limitations and hurdles to obtain and demonstrate benefit in patients, and the new developments that should allow new clinical applications with high beneficial potential are discussed.
neurodegenerative diseases are disorders characterized by progressive loss of neurons associated with deposition of proteins showing altered physicochemical properties in the brain and in peripheral organs. molecular classification of neurodegenerative disease is protein-based. this emphasizes the role of protein-processing systems in the pathogenesis. the most frequent proteins involved in the pathogenesis of neurodegenerative diseases are amyloid-β, prion protein, tau, α-synuclein, tar-dna-binding protein 43kda, and fused-in sarcoma protein. there are further proteins associated mostly with hereditary disorders such as proteins encoded by genes linked to trinucleotide repeat disorders, neuroserpin, ferritin, and familial cerebral amyloidoses. the clinical presentations are defined by the distinct involvement of functional systems and do not necessarily indicate the molecular pathologic background. seeding of pathologic proteins and hierarchic involvement of anatomic regions is commonly seen in neurodegenerative diseases. overlap of neurodegenerative diseases and combinations of different disorders is frequent. translation of neuropathologic categories of neurodegenerative diseases into in vivo detectable biomarkers is only partly achieved but intensive research is performed to reach this goal.
the complexity of neurodegeneration restricts the ability to understand and treat the neurological disorders affecting millions of people worldwide. therefore, there is an unmet need to develop new and more effective therapeutic strategies to combat these devastating conditions and that will only be achieved with a better understanding of the biological mechanism associated with disease conditions. recent studies highlight the role of dna damage, particularly, dna double-strand breaks (dsbs), in the progression of neuronal loss in a broad spectrum of human neurodegenerative diseases. this is not unexpected because neurons are prone to dna damage due to their non-proliferative nature and high metabolic activity. however, it is not clear if dsbs is a primary driver of neuronal loss in disease conditions or simply occurs concomitant with disease progression. here, we provide evidence that supports a critical role of dsbs in the pathogenesis of the neurodegenerative diseases. among different kinds of dna damages, dsbs are the most harmful and perilous type of dna damage and can lead to cell death if left unrepaired or repaired with error. in this review, we explore the current state of knowledge regarding the role of dsbs repair mechanisms in preserving neuronal function and survival and describe how dsbs could drive the molecular mechanisms resulting in neuronal death in neurodegenerative diseases such as alzheimer's disease, parkinson's disease, and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. we also discuss the potential implications of dsbs as a novel therapeutic target and prognostic marker in patients with neurodegenerative conditions.
human endogenous retroviruses (hervs) are genetic parasites, in-between genetics and environment. few hervs retain some coding capability. sometimes, the host has the advantage of some herv genes; conversely, hervs may contribute to pathogenesis. the expression of hervs depends on several factors, and is regulated epigenetically by stimuli such as inflammation, viral and microbial infections, etc. increased expression of hervs occurs in physiological and pathological conditions, in one or more body sites. several diseases have been attributed to one or more hervs, particularly neurological diseases. the key problem is to differentiate the expression of a herv as cause or effect of a disease. to be used as a biomarker, a correlation between the expression of a certain herv and the disease onset and/or behavior must be found. the greater challenge is to establish a pathogenic role. the criteria defining causal connections between hervs and diseases include the development of animal models, and disease modulation in humans, by anti-herv therapeutic antibody. so far, statistically significant correlations between hervs and diseases have been achieved for herv-w and multiple sclerosis; disease reproduction in transgenic animals was achieved for herv-w and multiple sclerosis, and for herv-k and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. clinical trials for both diseases are in progress.
sphingolipids (sl) modulate several cellular processes including cell death, proliferation and autophagy. the conversion of sphingomyelin (sm) to ceramide and the balance between ceramide and sphingosine-1-phosphate (s1p), also known as the sl rheostat, have been associated with oxidative stress and neurodegeneration. research in the last decade has focused on the possibility of targeting the sl metabolism as a therapeutic option; and sl levels in biofluids, including serum, plasma, and cerebrospinal fluid (csf), have been measured in several neurodegenerative diseases with the aim of finding a diagnostic or prognostic marker. previous reviews focused on results from diseases such as alzheimer's disease (ad), evaluated total sl or species levels in human biofluids, post-mortem tissues and/or animal models. however, a comprehensive review of sl alterations comparing results from several neurodegenerative diseases is lacking. the present work compiles data from circulating sphingolipidomic studies and attempts to elucidate a possible connection between certain sl species and neurodegeneration processes. furthermore, the effects of ceramide species according to their acyl-chain length in cellular pathways such as apoptosis and proliferation are discussed in order to understand the impact of the level alteration in specific species. finally, enzymatic regulations and the possible influence of insulin resistance in the level alteration of sl are evaluated.
a common molecular feature of amyloid neurodegenerative diseases is the unfolding/misfolding of specific proteins/peptides which consequently become prone to aggregate into toxic assemblies and deposits that are the key histopathological trait of these pathologies. apart from the rare early-onset familiar forms, these neurodegenerative diseases are age-associated disorders whose symptoms appear in aged people after long incubation periods. this makes the therapeutic approach particularly compelling and boosts the search for both early diagnostic tools and preventive approaches. in this last respect, natural compounds commonly present in foods and beverages are considered promising molecules, at least on the bench side. the so-called 'nutraceutical approach' suggests life-long healthy diets, particularly focusing on food molecules that are candidates to enter clinical trials as such or following a targeted molecular engineering. natural phenols abundant in 'healthy' foods such as extra virgin olive oil, red wine, green tea, red berries and spices, appear particularly promising. 
neurodegenerative diseases are a common cause of morbidity and cognitive impairment in older adults. most clinicians who care for the elderly are not trained to diagnose these conditions, perhaps other than typical alzheimer's disease (ad). each of these disorders has varied epidemiology, clinical symptomatology, laboratory and neuroimaging features, neuropathology, and management. thus, it is important that clinicians be able to differentiate and diagnose these conditions accurately. this review summarizes and highlights clinical aspects of several of the most commonly encountered neurodegenerative diseases, including ad, frontotemporal dementia (ftd) and its variants, progressive supranuclear palsy (psp), corticobasal degeneration (cbd), parkinson's disease (pd), dementia with lewy bodies (dlb), multiple system atrophy (msa), and huntington's disease (hd). for each condition, we provide a brief overview of the epidemiology, defining clinical symptoms and diagnostic criteria, relevant imaging and laboratory features, genetics, pathology, treatments, and differential diagnosis.
increasing evidence suggests that disruption of metal homeostasis contributes to the pathogenesis of various neurodegenerative diseases, including alzheimer's disease, prion diseases, lewy body diseases, and vascular dementia. conformational changes of disease-related proteins (amyloidogenic proteins), such as β-amyloid protein, prion proteins, and α-synuclein, are well-established contributors to neurotoxicity and to the pathogenesis of these diseases. recent studies have demonstrated that these amyloidogenic proteins are metalloproteins that bind trace elements, including zinc, iron, copper, and manganese, and play significant roles in the maintenance of metal homeostasis. we present a current review of the role of trace elements in the functions and toxicity of amyloidogenic proteins, and propose a hypothesis integrating metal homeostasis and the pathogenesis of neurodegenerative diseases that is focused on the interactions among metals and between metals and amyloidogenic proteins at the synapse, considering that these amyloidogenic proteins and metals are co-localized at the synapse.
stem cell-based therapies for neurodegenerative diseases aim at halting clinical deterioration by regeneration and by providing local support for damaged tissue. mesenchymal stem cells (mscs) hold great potential for cell therapy as they can be efficiently derived from adult tissue, ex vivo expanded in culture and safely transplanted autologously. mscs were also shown to be able to differentiate toward neural fates and to secrete a broad range of factors able to promote nervous tissue maintenance and repair. moreover, upon transplantation, mscs were shown capable of homing toward lesioned areas, implying their potential use as vehicles for therapeutic agents administration. indeed, various advantageous effects were reported following human mscs transplantation into rodent models of neurodegenerative diseases, such as neurotrophic factor-mediated protection, enhanced neurogenesis, modulation of inflammation, and abnormal protein aggregate clearance. per journal style, most nonstandard abbreviations must be used at least two times in the abstract to be retained; ntf was used once and thus has been deleted. recent studies have also used ex vivo manipulation for enhanced expression of potentially favorable factors, by so exploiting the homing capacity of mscs for effective expression at the lesion site. here, we will summarize current advancements in mscs-based therapies for neurodegenerative diseases. we will examine the roles of central mechanisms suggested to mediate the beneficial effects of mscs-based therapy and consider the augmentation of these mechanisms for superior clinical outcomes in rodent models of neurodegeneration as well as in clinical trials. stem cells 2017;35:1867-1880.
degenerative diseases of the nervous system impose substantial medical and public health burdens on populations throughout the world. alzheimer's disease (ad), parkinson's disease (pd), and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (als) are three of the major neurodegenerative diseases. the prevalence and incidence of these diseases rise dramatically with age; thus the number of cases is expected to increase for the foreseeable future as life spans in many countries continue to increase. causal contributions from genetic and environmental factors are, with some exceptions, poorly understood. nonetheless, molecular epidemiology approaches have proven valuable for improving disease diagnoses, characterizing disease prognostic factors, identifying high-risk genes for familial neurodegenerative diseases, investigating common genetic variants that may predict susceptibility for the non-familial forms of these diseases, and for quantifying environmental exposures. incorporation of molecular techniques, including genomics, proteomics, and measurements of environmental toxicant body burdens into epidemiologic research, offer considerable promise for enhancing progress on characterizing pathogenesis mechanisms and identifying specific risk factors, especially for the non-familial forms of these diseases. in this chapter, brief overviews are provided of the epidemiologic features of pd, ad, and als, as well as illustrative examples in which molecular epidemiologic approaches have advanced knowledge on underlying disease mechanisms and risk factors that might lead to improved medical management and ultimately disease prevention. the chapter concludes with some recommendations for future molecular epidemiology research.
the neuropathology of different neurodegenerative diseases begins in different brain regions, and involves distinct brain networks. evidence indicates that transcellular propagation of protein aggregation, which is the basis of prion disease, might underlie the progression of pathology in neurodegenerative diseases such as alzheimer's disease, parkinson's disease, and huntington's disease. the prion model predicts specific patterns of neuronal vulnerability and network involvement on the basis of the conformation of pathological proteins. indeed, evidence indicates that self-propagating aggregate conformers, or so-called strains, are associated with distinct neuropathological syndromes. the extension of this hypothesis to our understanding of common neurodegenerative disorders can suggest new therapeutic approaches, such as immunotherapy and small molecules, to block transcellular propagation, and new diagnostic tools to detect early evidence of disease.
although the impact of neurodegenerative diseases on everyday interactions is well known in the literature, their impact on social cognitive processes remains unclear. the concept of social cognition refers to a set of skills, all of which are essential for living in a community. it involves social knowledge, perception and processing of social cues, and representation of mental states. this report is a review of recent findings on the impact of cortical and subcortical neurodegenerative diseases on three social cognitive processes, namely, the theory of mind, empathy and processing emotions. the focus here is on a conceptual approach to each of these skills and their cerebral underpinnings.
neurodegenerative diseases constitute a major problem of public health that is associated with an increased risk of mortality and poor quality of life. malnutrition is considered as a major problem that worsens the prognosis of patients suffering from neurodegenerative diseases. in this aspect, the present review is aimed to critically collect and summarize all the available existing clinical data regarding the clinical impact of nutritional assessment in neurodegenerative diseases, highlighting on the crucial role of nutritional status in disease progression and management. according to the currently available clinical data, the nutritional status of patients seems to play a very important role in the development and progression of neurodegenerative diseases. a correct nutritional evaluation of neurodegenerative disease patients and a right nutrition intervention is essential in monitoring their disease.
abnormalities of oculomotor control accompany the pathological changes underlying many neurodegenerative diseases. clinical examination of eye movements can contribute to differential diagnosis, whereas quantitative laboratory measures can provide detailed insight into the disease process. in this review of eye movements in neurodegenerative disease, we summarise recent empirical findings and conceptual advances. oculomotor researchers continue to be particularly prolific in studying parkinson's disease but there is also substantial activity in alzheimer's disease and spinocerebellar ataxia. interesting findings have been reported in huntington's, motor neuron disease, and glaucoma. most studies report laboratory-based investigations but useful progress in clinical description continues to be made. eye movements remain an active field of investigation across a variety of neurodegenerative conditions. progress continues to be made at the clinical level as well by using laboratory techniques.
neurodegenerative and neurobehavioral diseases may be caused by chronic and neuropathic viral infections and may result in a loss of neurons and axons in the central nervous system that increases with age. to date, there is evidence of systemic viral infections that occur with some neurodegenerative conditions such as alzheimer's disease, parkinson's disease, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, multiple sclerosis, autism spectrum disorders, and hiv-associated neurocognitive disorders. with increasing lifespan, the incidence of neurodegenerative diseases increases consistently. neurodegenerative diseases affect approximately 37 million people worldwide and are an important cause of mortality. in addition to established non-viral-induced reasons for neurodegenerative diseases, neuropathic infections and viruses associated with neurodegenerative diseases have been proposed. neuronal degeneration can be either directly or indirectly affected by viral infection. viruses that attack the human immune system can also affect the nervous system and interfere with classical pathways of neurodegenerative diseases. viruses can enter the central nervous system, but the exact mechanism cannot be understood well. various studies have supported viral- and non-viral-mediated neurodegeneration at the cellular, molecular, genomic and proteomic levels. the main focus of this review is to illustrate the association between viral infections and both neurodegenerative and neurobehavioral diseases, so that the possible mechanism and pathway of neurodegenerative diseases can be better explained. this information will strengthen new concepts and ideas for neurodegenerative and neurobehavioral disease treatment. 
systems-based investigation of diseases requires integrated analysis of cellular networks and high-throughput data of gene products. the use of genome-scale metabolic networks for such integration has led to the elucidation of cellular mechanisms for several cell types from microorganisms to plants. it has become easier and cheaper to generate high-throughput data over years in the form of transcriptome, proteome and metabolome. this has tremendously improved the quality and quantity of information extracted from such data enabling the documentation of active pathways and reactions in cell metabolism. a number of omics-based datasets for several neurodegenerative diseases are now available in public repositories. this increases the potential of using genome-scale brain metabolic networks as a scaffold for this type of data to map metabolic alterations for the purpose of elucidating disease mechanisms and for the diagnosis and treatment of such disorders. this chapter first reviews omics data collected for neurodegenerative diseases to map their effect on metabolism. later, the potential for genome-scale metabolic modeling of such data is reviewed and discussed in light of recently reconstructed brain metabolic networks at genome-scale.
neurodegenerative diseases (nds) are the group of disorder that includes brain, peripheral nerves, spinal cord and results in sensory and motor neuron dysfunction. several studies have shown that mitochondrial dynamics and their axonal transport play a central role in most common nds such as alzheimer's disease (ad), parkinson's disease (pd), huntington's disease (hd) and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (als) etc. in normal physiological condition, there is a balance between mitochondrial fission and fusion process while any alteration to these processes cause defect in atp (adenosine triphosphate) biogenesis that lead to the onset of several nds. also, mitochondria mediated ros may induce lipid and protein peroxidation, energy deficiency environment in the neurons and results in cell death and defective neurotransmission. though, mitochondria is a well-studied cell organelle regulating the cellular energy demands but still, its detail role or association in nds is under observation. in this review, we have summarized an updated mitochondria and their possible role in different nds with the therapeutic strategy to improve the mitochondrial functions.
long noncoding rnas (lncrnas) are transcripts with low protein-coding potential but occupy a large part of transcriptional output. their roles include regulating gene expression at the epigenetic, transcriptional, and post-transcriptional level in cellular homeostasis. however, lncrna studies are still in their infancy and the functions of the vast majority of lncrna transcripts remain unknown. it is generally known that the function of the human nervous system largely relies on the precise regulation of gene expression. various studies have shown that lncrnas have a significant impact on normal neural development and on the development and progression of neurodegenerative diseases. in this review, we focused on recent studies associated with lncrnas in neurodegenerative diseases, including alzheimer's disease (ad), parkinson's disease (pd), huntington's disease (hd), amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (als), multiple system atrophy (msa), frontotemporal lobar degeneration (ftld), and glaucoma. glaucoma, caused by unexplained ganglion cell lesion and apoptosis, is now labeled as a chronic neurodegenerative disorder [1], and therefore, we discussed the association of lncrnas with glaucoma as well. we illustrate the role of some specific lncrnas, which may provide new insights into our understanding of the etiology and pathophysiology of the neurodegenerative diseases mentioned above.
therapeutic strategies that target pathways of protein misfolding and the toxicity of intermediates along these pathways are mainly at discovery and early development stages, with the exception of monoclonal antibodies that have mainly failed to produce convincing clinical benefits in late stage trials. the clinical failures represent potentially critical lessons for future neurodegenerative disease drug development. more effective drugs may be achieved by pursuing the following two strategies. first, conformational targeting of aggregates of misfolded proteins, rather than less specific binding that includes monomer subunits, which vastly outnumber the toxic targets. second, since neurodegenerative diseases frequently include more than one potential protein pathology, generic targeting of aggregates by shape might also be a crucial feature of a drug candidate. incorporating both of these critical features into a viable drug candidate along with high affinity binding has not been achieved with small molecule approaches or with antibody fragments. monoclonal antibodies developed so far are not broadly acting through conformational recognition. using gaim (general amyloid interaction motif) represents a novel approach that incorporates high affinity conformational recognition for multiple protein assemblies, as well as recognition of an array of assemblies along the misfolding pathway between oligomers and fibers. a gaim-ig fusion, npt088, is nearing clinical testing.
neurodegenerative diseases, such as alzheimer's, parkinson's, creutzfeldt-jacob, huntington's diseases and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, are mainly characterized by the massive deposition of misfolded protein aggregates consequent to aberrant production or overexpression of specific proteins. the development of new therapeutics for the treatment of neurodegenerative pathophysiologies currently stands at a crossroads. this presents an opportunity to transition future drug discovery efforts to target disease modification, an area in which much still remains unknown. in this review we examine recent progress in the area of neurodegenerative drug discovery, focusing on some of the most common targets.
neurodegenerative diseases have been an unsolved riddle for quite a while; to date, there are no proper and effective curative treatments and only palliative and symptomatic treatments are available to treat these illnesses. the absence of therapeutic treatments for neurodegenerative ailments has huge economic hit and strain on the society. pharmacotherapies and various surgical procedures like deep brain stimulation are being given to the patient, but they are only effective for the symptoms and not for the diseases. this paper reviews the recent studies and development of stem cell therapy for neurodegenerative disorders. stem cell-based treatment is a promising new way to deal with neurodegenerative diseases. stem cell transplantation can advance useful recuperation by delivering trophic elements that impel survival and recovery of host neurons in animal models and patients with neurodegenerative maladies. several mechanisms, for example, substitution of lost cells, cell combination, release of neurotrophic factor, proliferation of endogenous stem cell, and transdifferentiation, may clarify positive remedial results. with the current advancements in the stem cell therapies, a new hope for the cure has come out since they have potential to be a cure for the same. this review compiles stem cell therapy recent conceptions in neurodegenerative and neurometabolic diseases and updates in this field. graphical absract ᅟ.
this work critically reviews chronic traumatic encephalopathy (cte), with a specific focus on the single criterion necessary and sufficient for diagnosis. herein, cte is compared to other well-established neurodegenerative entities including alzheimer's disease and dementia with lewy bodies. each neurodegenerative disorder is reviewed in five pertinent areas: 1) historical perspective, 2) guideline formation process, 3) clinical diagnostic criteria, 4) pathological diagnostic criteria, and 5) validation of previously described diagnostic criteria (e.g., sensitivity and specificity). these comparisons indicate that cte is a disease in the earliest stages of formation and has yet to undergo rigorous development and refinement similar to other neurodegenerative diseases. suggested future revisions to the diagnostic criterion of cte include establishing a lower threshold for accumulation of pathology, as well as accounting for the presence of concomitant neuropathology and comorbid neurodegenerative disorders. currently, while initial efforts have been attempted, agreed upon antemortem clinical criteria do not exist. as has been the scientific standard with similar neurodegenerative disorders, antemortem diagnostic guidelines should first be refined through subcommittees of neuroscientists from diverse institutional backgrounds with a subclassification of levels of diagnostic certainty (possible, probably, and definite). validation studies should then assess the predictive value and accuracy of proposed antemortem diagnostic criteria in relation to potential pathological criteria.
neurodegenerative diseases (nds) represent one of the most important public health problems and concerns, as they are a growing cause of mortality and morbidity worldwide, particularly in the elderly. despite remarkable breakthroughs in our understanding of nds, there has been little success in developing effective therapies. the use of natural products may offer great potential opportunities in the prevention and therapy of nds; however, many clinical concerns have arisen regarding their use, mainly focusing on the lack of scientific support or evidence for their efficacy and patient safety. these clinical uncertainties raise critical questions from a bioethical and legal point of view, as considerations relating to patient decisional autonomy, patient safety, and beneficial or non-beneficial care may need to be addressed. this paper does not intend to advocate for or against the use of natural products, but to analyze the ethical framework of their use, with particular attention paid to the principles of biomedical ethics. in conclusion, the notable message that emerges is that natural products may represent a great promise for the treatment of many nds, even if many unknown issues regarding the efficacy and safety of many natural products still remain.
the purpose of this review is to provide an update on comorbidities in neurodegenerative conditions. the term comorbidity is used here to distinguish cases with overlapping pathogenic mechanisms, which includes combinations of neurodegenerative proteinopathies from cases with multimorbidity, which is defined as concomitant brain and systemic disorders with different pathogenic mechanisms. comorbid proteinopathies are more frequent in both sporadic and hereditary neurodegenerative diseases than previously assumed. the most frequent additional proteinopathies are related to alzheimer's disease, lewy body disorder, and limbic predominant transactive response dna-binding protein 43 proteinopathy, however, different forms of tau pathologies are also increasingly recognized. in addition to ageing, synergistic interaction of proteins, common disease pathways, and the influence of genetic variations are discussed as possible pathogenic players. comorbid proteinopathies might influence the clinical course and have implications for biomarker and therapeutic development. as pure forms of proteinopathies are still observed, the notion of current molecular classification is justified. this corroborates elucidation of various pathogenic pathways leading to neurodegeneration. assuming that single proteins and associated pathways are targeted in therapy trials, efforts are needed to better stratify patients and to select pure proteinopathy forms lacking unfavorable genetic constellations. otherwise combined therapeutic strategies might be necessary for comorbid proteinopathies.
reactive oxygen species (ros) are essential molecules for many physiological functions and act as second messengers in a large variety of tissues. an imbalance in the production and elimination of ros is associated with human diseases including neurodegenerative disorders. in the last years the notion that neurodegenerative diseases are accompanied by chronic viral infections, which may result in an increase of neurodegenerative diseases progression, emerged. it is known in literature that enhanced viral infection risk, observed during neurodegeneration, is partly due to the increase of ros accumulation in brain cells. however, the molecular mechanisms of viral infection, occurring during the progression of neurodegeneration, remain unclear. in this review, we discuss the recent knowledge regarding the role of influenza, herpes simplex virus type-1, and retroviruses infection in ros/rns-mediated parkinson's disease (pd), alzheimer's disease (ad), and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (als). 
rare genetic diseases affect about 7% of the general population and over 7000 distinct clinical syndromes have been described with the majority being due to single gene defects. this review will provide a critical overview of genetic strategies that are being pioneered to halt or reverse disease progression in inherited neurodegenerative diseases. this field of research covers a vast area and only the most promising treatment paradigms will be discussed with a particular focus on inherited eye diseases, which have paved the way for innovative gene therapy paradigms, and mitochondrial diseases, which are currently generating a lot of debate centred on the bioethics of germline manipulation.
the crispr/cas genome editing tool has led to a revolution in biological research. its ability to target multiple genomic loci simultaneously allows its application in gene function and genomic manipulation studies. its involvement in the sequence specific gene editing in different backgrounds has changed the scenario of treating genetic diseases. by unravelling the mysteries behind complex neuronal circuits, it not only paved way in understanding the pathogenesis of the disease but helped in the development of large animal models of different neuronal diseases; thereby opened the gateways of successfully treating different neuronal diseases. this review explored the possibility of using of crispr/cas in engineering dna at the embryonic stage, as well as during the functioning of different cell types in the brain, to delineate implications related to the use of this super-specialized genome editing tool to overcome various neurodegenerative diseases that arise as a result of genetic mutations.
the acute and chronic effects of traumatic brain injury (tbi) have been widely described; however, there is limited knowledge on how a tbi sustained during early adulthood or mid-adulthood will influence aging. epidemiological studies have explored whether tbi poses a risk for dementia and other neurodegenerative diseases associated with aging. we will discuss the influence of tbi and resulting medical comorbidities such as endocrine, sleep, and inflammatory disturbances on age-related gray and white matter changes and cognitive decline. post mortem studies examining amyloid, tau, and other proteins will be discussed within the context of neurodegenerative diseases and chronic traumatic encephalopathy. the data support the suggestion that pathological changes triggered by an earlier tbi will have an influence on normal aging processes and will interact with neurodegenerative disease processes rather than the development of a specific disease, such as alzheimer's or parkinson's. chronic neurophysiologic change after tbi may have detrimental effects on neurodegenerative disease.
neurodegenerative diseases, for instance alzheimer's disease (ad) and parkinson's disease (pd), affect the peripheral nervous system, where nerve cells send messages that control muscles in order to allow movements. sick neurons cannot control muscles properly. handwriting involves cognitive planning, coordination, and execution abilities. significant changes in handwriting performance are a prominent feature of ad and pd. this paper addresses the most relevant results obtained in the field of online (dynamic) analysis of handwritten trials by ad and pd patients. the survey is made from a pattern recognition point of view, so that different phases are described. data acquisition deals not only with the device, but also with the handwriting task. feature extraction can deal with function and parameter features. the classification problem is also discussed along with results already obtained. this paper also highlights the most profitable research directions.
: novel insights in the development of a precision medicine approach for treating the neurodegenerative diseases (ndds) are provided by emerging advances in the field of pharmacoepigenomics. in this context, micrornas (mirnas) have been extensively studied because of their implication in several disorders related to the central nervous system, as well as for their potential role as biomarkers of diagnosis, prognosis, and response to treatment. recent studies in the field of neurodegeneration reported evidence that drug response and efficacy can be modulated by mirna-mediated mechanisms. in fact, mirnas seem to regulate the expression of pharmacology target genes, while approved (conventional and non-conventional) therapies can restore altered mirnas observed in ndds. the knowledge of mirna pharmacoepigenomics may offers new clues to develop more effective treatments by providing novel insights into interindividual variability in drug disposition and response. recently, the therapeutic potential of mirnas is gaining increasing attention, and mirna-based drugs (for cancer) have been under observation in clinical trials. however, the effective use of mirnas as therapeutic target still needs to be investigated. here, we report a brief review of representative studies in which mirnas related to therapeutic effects have been investigated in ndds, providing exciting potential prospects of mirnas in pharmacoepigenomics and translational medicine.
alzheimer's disease (ad), parkinson's disease (pd), and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis with associated frontotemporal dementia (als/ftd) are major neurodegenerative diseases for which there are no cures. all are characterised by damage to several seemingly disparate cellular processes. the broad nature of this damage makes understanding pathogenic mechanisms and devising new treatments difficult. can the different damaged functions be linked together in a common disease pathway and which damaged function should be targeted for therapy? many functions damaged in neurodegenerative diseases are regulated by communications that mitochondria make with a specialised region of the endoplasmic reticulum (er; mitochondria-associated er membranes or 'mam'). moreover, several recent studies have shown that disturbances to er-mitochondria contacts occur in neurodegenerative diseases. here, we review these findings. 
neurodegenerative diseases are a heterogeneous group of disorders that are incurable and characterized by the progressive degeneration of the function and structure of the central nervous system (cns) for reasons that are not yet understood. neurodegeneration is the umbrella term for the progressive death of nerve cells and loss of brain tissue. because of their high energy requirements, neurons are especially vulnerable to injury and death from dysfunctional mitochondria. widespread damage to mitochondria causes cells to die because they can no longer produce enough energy. several lines of pathological and physiological evidence reveal that impaired mitochondrial function and dynamics play crucial roles in aging and pathogenesis of neurodegenerative diseases. as mitochondria are the major intracellular organelles that regulate both cell survival and death, they are highly considered as a potential target for pharmacological-based therapies. the purpose of this review was to present the current status of our knowledge and understanding of the involvement of mitochondrial dysfunction in pathogenesis of neurodegenerative diseases including alzheimer's disease (ad), parkinson's disease (pd), huntington's disease (hd), and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (als) and the importance of mitochondrial biogenesis as a potential novel therapeutic target for their treatment. likewise, we highlight a concise overview of the key roles of mitochondrial electron transport chain (etc.) complexes as well as mitochondrial biogenesis regulators regarding those diseases.
pathogenesis of degenerative diseases is complex and multifaceted. the disease phenotypes depend on the location of injury/damage in the brain networks and pathologically are characterized by loss of brain cells. the reason for this loss appears to be an accumulation of misfolded and dysfunctional proteins that trigger apoptotic cell death. the role of alpha-synuclein mutations, its interaction with other proteins and the cellular environment is discussed in the context of selective neuron loss.
neurodegenerative diseases, including alzheimer's disease (ad), parkinson's disease (pd), huntington's disease (hd) and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (als), originate from a loss of neurons in the central nervous system (cns) and are severely debilitating. the incidence of neurodegenerative diseases increases with age, and they are expected to become more common due to extended life expectancy. because of no clear mechanisms, these diseases have become a major challenge in neurobiology. it is well recognized that these disorders become the culmination of many different genetic and environmental influences. prior studies have shown that micrornas (mirnas) are pathologically altered during the inexorable course of some neurodegenerative diseases, suggesting that mirnas may be the contributing factor in neurodegeneration. here, we review what is known about the involvement of mirnas in the pathogenesis of neurodegenerative diseases. the biogenesis of mirnas and various functions of mirnas that act as the chief regulators will be discussed. we focus in particular on dysregulation of mirnas which leads to several neurodegenerative diseases from three aspects: mirna-generating disorders, mirna-targeting genes and epigenetic alterations. furthermore, recent evidences have shown that circulating mirna expression levels are changed in patients with neurodegenerative diseases. circulating mirna expression levels are reported in patients in order to evaluate their application as biomarkers of these diseases. a discussion is included with a potential diagnostic biomarker and the possible future direction in exploring the nexus between mirnas and various neurodegenerative diseases. 
neurodegenerative diseases are considered a serious life-threatening issue regardless of age. resulting nerve damage progressively affects important activities, such as movement, coordination, balance, breathing, speech and the functioning of vital organs. reports on the subject have concluded that neurodegenerative disease can be caused by mutations of susceptible genes, alcohol consumption, toxins, chemicals and other unknown environmental factors. although several diagnostic techniques can be used to determine aetiologies, the process is difficult and often fails. research shows that nasopharyngeal and gut microbiota play important roles in brain to spinal cord coordination. however, no conclusive epidemiologic evidence is available on the roles played by respiratory and gut microbiota in the development of neurodegenerative diseases. thus, understanding the connection between respiratory and gut microbiota and the nervous system could provide information on causal links. the present review describes future perspectives on the role played by nasopharyngeal and gut microbiota in the development of neurodegenerative diseases.
neurodegenerative diseases are increasing in prevalence in many countries as the average age of their populations increases, since many of these disorders occur more frequently in elderly individuals, placing an increasing burden on healthcare resources. most neurodegenerative disorders are associated with accumulations of abnormal proteins in the central nervous system (cns), which result in neuronal degeneration and ultimately neuronal death. recent developments in molecular pathology and genetics have allowed the identification of the abnormal proteins involved in many neurodegenerative disorders and the genes that encode these proteins. this has led to a fuller understanding of the mechanisms of many of these diseases, but this has not so far been accompanied by major improvements in diagnostic tests or treatments for these disorders. prion diseases are rare neurodegenerative disorders that are associated with the accumulation of a misfolded host protein, the prion protein, in the cns. prion diseases have been considered as a paradigm for protein misfolding diseases, but there are significant differences between prion diseases and other neurodegenerative disorders, not least in the transmissible nature of prion diseases. in this review we give an overview of the wide range of neurodegenerative diseases that affect humans, and compare the molecular pathology of prion diseases with other neurodegenerative diseases. the concept of proteinopathy as a common mechanism in neurodegenerative disorders is explored, and we highlight the improvements in diagnosis and management required to improve our treatment of these devastating conditions.
neurodegenerative diseases are more common in older individuals and are progressively debilitating. due to the aging of the american population, the burden of neurodegenerative diseases on the health care infrastructure will likely significantly increase in the near future. genetic science has advanced our understanding of the pathology driving these diseases thereby informing new, individualized care paradigms. although translation into clinical practice is slow, there are a few examples of instances where precision medicine is making a difference in the care of patients with neurodegenerative diseases that may be driven by genetic background. this article provides a brief overview of the current knowledge of genetic influences on two common neurodegenerative diseases, alzheimer disease and parkinson disease, as well as ways this knowledge is being tested for a precision medicine approach to care.
according to the projections of the statistical office of the european union, eurostat, nearly one third of eu citizens will be at least 65 in 2060. the u.s. population age 65 and older continues to increase and is projected to nearly double from 48 million to 88 million by 2050. elderly people are especially exposed to neurodegenerative diseases (nds). the most common nd is alzheimer's disease (ad), a chronic and progressive disorder with a variety of pathological changes within neuronal tissue, which begin even 10-15 years before the onset of cognitive impairment symptoms. ad is perceived as a disease continuum and considered to include three basic phases: preclinical (asymptomatic) stage, mild cognitive impairment (mci), and dementia due to ad. a very important issue, from medical and legal perspectives, is the nds patient's consent to medical procedures, including diagnostic procedures, such as lumber puncture. nds patients are not always able to express their consent and do not always understand the information provided by a physician. this applies to a group of patients in the final stages of nds. this paper presents legal regulations of selected european countries and signalizes the u.s. legal solutions on the issue of nds patients' informed consent to medical procedures.
genetics and pathology have proven to be an effective combination to identify an evolving and deepening landscape of pathways and potential therapeutic targets in neurodegenerative diseases. initially this landscape appeared to be populated with distinct therapeutic targets but with potentially overlapping mechanisms in each neurodegenerative disease. our understanding has expanded to recognize that multiple pathologies are common in neurodegenerative disease, and that there is considerable overlap in pathways and targets driving neurodegenerative diseases. this potentially opens the way for future treatments to be indicated by tissue pathology and genetic basis rather than clinical phenotype. the potential to treat neurodegenerative disease by addressing underlying pathophysiology is still in the early days and challenges remain, especially the likely need to address pathologies early in disease. this will require redefinition of diagnosis and the tools to enable earlier diagnosis. 
dna double-strand breaks (dsbs) are common events that were recognized as one of the most toxic lesions in eukaryotic cells. dsbs are widely involved in many physiological processes such as v(d)j recombination, meiotic recombination, dna replication and transcription. deregulation of dsbs has been reported in multiple diseases in human beings, such as the neurodegenerative diseases, with which the underlying mechanisms are needed to be illustrated. here, we reviewed the recent insights into the dysfunction of dsb formation and repair, contributing to the pathogenesis of neurodegenerative disorders including alzheimer's disease (ad), amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (als), huntington's disease (hd) and ataxia telangiectasia (a-t).
in this article the neurotoxic disorders appearing in patients exposed to organophosphorus pesticides and known mechanisms involved are reviewed. organophosphorus compounds cause four main neurotoxic effects in humans: the cholinergic syndrome, the intermediate syndrome, organophosphate-induced delayed polyneuropathy and chronic organophosphate-induced neuropsychiatric disorder. compared to the cholinergic syndrome, that causes millions of cases of poisoning with fatality of more than 15% each year, other disorders involve much smaller number of patients. possible link of exposure to organophosphorus pesticides with neurodegenerative diseases, dementia, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder and parkinson's disease in man is also approached. this article is focused on neurotoxic disorders appearing after acute and chronic exposure to organophosphates with emphasis on molecular mechanisms, clinical presentation, pathogenesis, and possibilities for prevention/medical treatment.
nutrition and diet have been suggested to enhance or inhibit cognitive performance and the risk of several neurodegenerative diseases. we conducted a systematic review to elucidate the relationship between the inflammatory capacity of a person's diet and the risk of incident neurodegenerative diseases. we searched major medical databases for articles published through june 30, 2018. original, full-text, english-language articles on studies with human participants which investigated the link between dietary inflammatory potential and risk of developing neurodegenerative diseases were included. duplicate and irrelevant studies were removed, and data were compiled through critical analysis. initially, 457 articles were collected via the searching method, of which 196 studies remained after removal of duplicates. fourteen articles were screened and found to be relevant to the scope of the review. after critical analysis, 10 were included in the final review. in all studies but one, a higher dietary inflammatory index (dii) was related to higher risk of developing neurodegenerative disease symptoms, including memory and cognition decline and multiple sclerosis. of 3 studies that assessed the association of dii with levels of circulating inflammation markers, 2 indicated that dii was positively correlated with inflammatory marker levels. low literacy, an unhealthy lifestyle, and individual nutritional status were the factors involved in a diet with inflammatory potential. these findings enhance confidence that dii is an appropriate tool for measurement of dietary inflammatory potential and validate the role of diets with inflammatory potential in the pathophysiology of neurodegenerative diseases. dii may be correlated with levels of circulating inflammatory markers.
neurodegenerative diseases (ngds) such as alzheimer's and parkinson's are debilitating and largely untreatable conditions strongly linked to age. the clinical, neuropathological, and genetic components of ngds indicate that neurodegeneration is a complex trait determined by multiple genes and by the environment. the symptoms of ngds differ among individuals due to their genetic background, and this variation affects the onset and progression of ngd and ngd-like states. such genetic variation affects the molecular and cellular processes underlying ngds, leading to differential clinical phenotypes. so far, we have a limited understanding of the mechanisms of individual background variation. here, we consider how variation between genetic backgrounds affects the mechanisms of aging and proteostasis in ngd phenotypes. we discuss how the nematode caenorhabditis elegans can be used to identify the role of variation between genetic backgrounds. additionally, we review advances in c. elegans methods that can facilitate the identification of ngd regulators and/or networks. genetic variation both in disease genes and in regulatory factors that modulate onset and progression of ngds are incompletely understood. the nematode c. elegans represents a valuable system in which to address such questions.
the study of protein misfolding and aggregation saw resurgence in the last decade. aggregation is the main cause of several human neurodegenerative diseases which makes this field as the leading edge in the science today. protein aggregation is a highly complex process resulting in formation of a variety of aggregates with different structures and morphologies. many of them are highly cytotoxic. in-depth knowledge about structure, mechanism of formation, and physiological effects of aggregates will shed new light on the aggregation-mediated cell toxicity, and helps in deciphering new target for drug design and development. this review summarizes the existing information on the molecular mechanism of protein misfolding and aggregation involved in neurodegeneration stressing on the possible therapeutic intervention in neurodegenerative diseases. as our knowledge about the relation between the protein misfolding and disease pathogenesis will be enhanced, more specific and promising treatment opportunities will come into existence.
alzheimer's disease, parkinson's disease, multiple sclerosis, and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis are a few examples of debilitating neurological/neurodegenerative diseases for which there are currently no curative treatments. recent evidence has strongly suggested a role for neuroinflammation in both the onset and progression of these diseases. however, the mechanisms that initiate neuroinflammation are presently unclear. mounting evidence suggests that environmental factors are likely involved. one proposed mechanism linking both genetic and environmental factors is dysregulation of the antiviral response. indeed, many mutations that have been linked to neurological conditions occur in genes related to the antiviral response. although the products of these genes may have potent antiviral activities - they can also have deleterious effects when their expression is not appropriately regulated. for that reason, expression of antiviral genes is a tightly controlled process. herein, we review the various antiviral genes that have been linked to neurological conditions. we focus specifically on type i interferonopathies, the symptoms of which are often evident at birth, and neurodegenerative diseases, which frequently onset later in life.
multifactorial disorders are the result of nonlinear interactions of several factors; therefore, a reductionist approach does not appear to be appropriate. proteomics is a global approach that can be efficiently used to investigate pathogenetic mechanisms of neurodegenerative diseases. here, we report a general introduction about the systems biology approach and mechanistic insights recently obtained by over-representation analysis of proteomics data of cellular and animal models of alzheimer's disease, parkinson's disease and other neurodegenerative disorders, as well as of affected human tissues. expert commentary: as an inductive method, proteomics is based on unbiased observations that further require validation of generated hypotheses. pathway databases and over-representation analysis tools allow researchers to assign an expectation value to pathogenetic mechanisms linked to neurodegenerative diseases. the systems biology approach based on omics data may be the key to unravel the complex mechanisms underlying neurodegeneration.
the trend of growing population of 60+ years old people is visible in most of the highly developed european countries. recently researchers have shown an increased interest in aging-associated diseases including neurological disorders. neurodegenerative diseases are a very important clinical problem for several reasons. one of the key aspects are: frequency of occurrence as well as difficulties in the diagnosis, therapeutic problems and care of elderly patients. furthermore, the very important point is the significant decrease of quality of life of untreated patients and late-stage diagnosis of the disease. it is crucial to develop a new, faster, high specificity and more sensitive diagnostic technology. metabolomic profiling is a new, promising field of systems biology which may be applied in screening, diagnosis, disease typing and monitoring of treatment. it is a biochemical approach for biomarker discovery. amino acids (aa) play very integral roles in the central nervous system as neurotransmitters, regulators of metabolism and neuromodulators. research presented in this publication is focused on patients with parkinson's disease, alzheimer disease, and elderly patients. in all analyzed cases significant changes in the amino acid profile in patients comparing to healthy controls were observed. this study indicates potential of amino acid profiling as a method for diagnosis.
insulin, a pancreatic hormone, is best known for its peripheral effects on the metabolism of glucose, fats and proteins. there is a growing body of evidence linking insulin action in the brain to neurodegenerative diseases. insulin present in central nervous system is a regulator of central glucose metabolism nevertheless this glucoregulation is not the main function of insulin in the brain. brain is known to be specifically vulnerable to oxidative products relative to other organs and altered brain insulin signaling may cause or promote neurodegenerative diseases which invalidates and reduces the quality of life. insulin located within the brain is mostly of pancreatic origin or is produced in the brain itself crosses the blood-brain barrier and enters the brain via a receptor-mediated active transport system. brain insulin, insulin receptor and insulin receptor substrate-mediated signaling pathways play important roles in the regulation of peripheral metabolism, feeding behavior, memory and maintenance of neural functions such as neuronal growth and differentiation, neuromodulation and neuroprotection. in the present review, we would like to summarize the novel biological and pathophysiological roles of neuronal insulin in neurodegenerative diseases and describe the main signaling pathways in use for therapeutic strategies in the use of insulin to the cerebral tissues and their biological applications to neurodegenerative diseases. 
prions are notorious protein-only infectious agents that cause invariably fatal brain diseases following silent incubation periods that can span a lifetime. these diseases can arise spontaneously, through infection or be inherited. remarkably, prions are composed of self-propagating assemblies of a misfolded cellular protein that encode information, generate neurotoxicity and evolve and adapt in vivo. although parallels have been drawn with alzheimer's disease and other neurodegenerative conditions involving the deposition of assemblies of misfolded proteins in the brain, insights are now being provided into the usefulness and limitations of prion analogies and their aetiological and therapeutic relevance.
during the last few years, the understanding of the dysregulated hydrogen ion dynamics and reversed proton gradient of cancer cells has resulted in a new and integral ph-centric paradigm in oncology, a translational model embracing from cancer etiopathogenesis to treatment. the abnormalities of intracellular alkalinization along with extracellular acidification of all types of solid tumors and leukemic cells have never been described in any other disease and now appear to be a specific hallmark of malignancy. as a consequence of this intracellular acid-base homeostatic failure, the attempt to induce cellular acidification using proton transport inhibitors and other intracellular acidifiers of different origins is becoming a new therapeutic concept and selective target of cancer treatment, both as a metabolic mediator of apoptosis and in the overcoming of multiple drug resistance (mdr). importantly, there is increasing data showing that different ion channels contribute to mediate significant aspects of cancer ph regulation and etiopathogenesis. finally, we discuss the extension of this new ph-centric oncological paradigm into the opposite metabolic and homeostatic acid-base situation found in human neurodegenerative diseases (hndds), which opens novel concepts in the prevention and treatment of hndds through the utilization of a cohort of neural and non-neural derived hormones and human growth factors.
matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization (maldi) time-of-flight (tof) imaging mass spectrometry (ims) enables localization of analytes of interest along with histology. more specifically, maldi-ims identifies the distributions of proteins, peptides, small molecules, lipids, and drugs and their metabolites in tissues, with high spatial resolution. this unique capacity to directly analyze tissue samples without the need for lengthy sample preparation reduces technical variability and renders maldi-ims ideal for the identification of potential diagnostic and prognostic biomarkers and disease gradation. maldi-ims has evolved rapidly over the last decade and has been successfully used in both medical and basic research by scientists worldwide. in this review, we explore the clinical applications of maldi-ims, focusing on the major cancer types and neurodegenerative diseases. in particular, we re-emphasize the diagnostic potential of ims and the challenges that must be confronted when conducting maldi-ims in clinical settings. this article is part of a special issue entitled: maldi imaging, edited by dr. corinna henkel and prof. peter hoffmann.
the aggregation of specific proteins plays a pivotal role in the etiopathogenesis of several neurodegenerative diseases (nds). β-amyloid (aβ) peptide-containing plaques and intraneuronal neurofibrillary tangles composed of hyperphosphorylated protein tau are the two main neuropathological lesions in alzheimer's disease. meanwhile, parkinson's disease is defined by the presence of intraneuronal inclusions (lewy bodies), in which α-synuclein (α-syn) has been identified as a major protein component. the current literature provides considerable insights into the mechanisms underlying oligomeric-related neurodegeneration, as well as the relationship between protein aggregation and nd, thus facilitating the development of novel putative biomarkers and/or pharmacological targets. recently, α-syn, tau and aβ have been shown to interact each other or with other "pathological proteins" to form toxic heteroaggregates. these latest findings are overcoming the concept that each neurodegenerative disease is related to the misfolding of a single specific protein. in this review, potential opportunities and pharmacological approaches targeting α-syn, tau and aβ and their oligomeric forms are highlighted with examples from recent studies. protein aggregation as a biomarker of nds, in both the brain and peripheral fluids, is deeply explored. finally, the relationship between biomarker establishment and assessment and their use as diagnostics or therapeutic targets are discussed.
cellular autophagy is a major degradative pathway for clearance of aggregate-prone proteins and damaged organelles. it plays an important role in regulating cellular homeostasis, cell growth and development, and disease development. dysfunctional autophagy contributes to the pathology of various neurodegenerative diseases, such as alzheimer's disease, parkinson's disease and huntington's disease, in which specific pathological protein accumulation occurs. a growing body of evidence suggests that resveratrol plays a significantly role in the regulation of autophagy and clearance of pathological proteins. resveratrol is a potential drug for neurodegenerative diseases therapy. this review focuses on the effects of resveratrol on cellular autophagy and clinical application in the control of neurodegenerative diseases.
mitochondria are organelles responsible for vital cell functions. p53 is a transcription factor that regulates the dna stability and cell growth normality. recent studies revealed that p53 can influence mitochondrial function changing from normal condition to abnormal condition under different stress levels. in normal state, p53 can maintain mitochondrial respiration through transactivation of sco2. when stress stimuli presents, sco2 overexpresses and leads to ros generation. ros promotes p53 inducing malm (mieap-induced accumulation of lysosome-like organelles within mitochondria) to repair dysfunctional mitochondria and miv (mieap-induced vacuole) to accomplish damaged mitochondria degradation. if stress or damage is irreversible, p53 will translocate to mitochondria, leading into apoptosis or necrosis. neurodegenerative diseases including parkinson's disease, huntington's disease and alzheimer's disease are still lack of clear explanations of mechanisms, but more studies have revealed the functional relationship between mitochondria and p53 towards the pathological development of these diseases. in this review, we discuss that p53 plays the vital role in the function of mitochondria in the aspect of pathological change metabolism. we also analyze these diseases with novel targeted treating molecules which are related to p53 and mitochondria, hoping to present novel therapies in future clinic.
the past decade has witnessed an explosion of evidence suggesting that many neurodegenerative diseases can be detected years, if not decades, earlier than previously thought. to date, these scientific advances have not provoked any parallel translational or clinical improvements. there is an urgency to capitalize on this momentum so earlier detection of disease can be more readily translated into improved health-related quality of life for families at risk for, or suffering with, neurodegenerative diseases. in this review, we discuss health-related quality of life (hrqol) measurement in neurodegenerative diseases and the importance of these "patient reported outcomes" for all clinical research. next, we address hrqol following early identification or predictive genetic testing in some neurodegenerative diseases: huntington disease, alzheimer's disease, parkinson's disease, dementia with lewy bodies, frontotemporal dementia, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, prion diseases, hereditary ataxias, dentatorubral-pallidoluysian atrophy and wilson's disease. after a brief report of available direct-to-consumer genetic tests, we address the juxtaposition of earlier disease identification with assumed reluctance toward predictive genetic testing. forty-one studies examining health-related outcomes following predictive genetic testing for neurodegenerative disease suggested that (a) extreme or catastrophic outcomes are rare; (b) consequences commonly include transiently increased anxiety and/or depression; (c) most participants report no regret; (d) many persons report extensive benefits to receiving genetic information; and (e) stigmatization and discrimination for genetic diseases are poorly understood and policy and laws are needed. caution is appropriate for earlier identification of neurodegenerative diseases but findings suggest further progress is safe, feasible and likely to advance clinical care. 
the purpose of this review is to discuss potential pathways involved in the pathogenesis of neurodegenerative diseases, highlighting current pharmacological drug targets in neuronal apoptosis prevention. the incidence of these disorders is expected to rise in the coming years and so finding effective treatments represents a significant challenge for medicine. alzheimer's disease and parkinson's disease were both described almost a century ago and are the most important neurodegenerative disorders in the developed world. however, the molecular mechanisms that lead to the development of the neuronal pathology in both diseases are unclear. for this reason, despite substantial research in the area, an effective treatment for these diseases does not yet exist. in the present study we discuss in depth the pathways involved in apoptosis and neuronal death in neurodegenerative diseases. we also examine drugs that may have a neuroprotective effect. inhibition of apoptosis mediated by oxidative stress generation and mitochondrial alteration or by the blockade of nmda receptors could constitute a suitable therapeutic strategy for alzheimer's disease. a multiple therapy with antioxidants, cell cycle inhibitors, gsk3β inhibitors, and statins could, in the future, represent a suitable strategy for delaying the progression of neurodegenerative diseases. this research contributes to the development of new methods in the field of apoptosis inhibitors that could provide the future tools for the treatment of alzheimer's and parkinson's disease, as well as other neurodegenerative diseases.
neurodegenerative diseases are characterized by the neurodegenerative changes or apoptosis of neurons involved in networks, which are important to specific physiological functions. with the development of old-aging society, the incidence of neurodegenerative diseases is on the increase. however, it is difficult to diagnose for most of neurodegenerative diseases. at present, there are too few effective therapies. advances in stem cell biology have raised the hope and possibility for the therapy of neurodegenerative diseases. recently, stem cells have been widely attempted to treat neurodegenerative diseases of animal model. here we review the progress and prospects of various stem cells, including embryonic stem cells, mesenchymal stem cell and neural stem cells and so on, for the treatments of neurodegenerative diseases, such as parkinson's disease, alzheimer's disease, huntington' disease and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis/lou gehrig's disease.
